03_cput.md, before:

---
bibliography: references.bib
---

# Counterfactual Predicted Utility Theory

As discussed in the last chapter, the neurotransmitter dopamine seemingly encodes information about actual and counterfactual rewards,[@kishida2016] and their integration may play a guiding role in decision-making. With this neural evidence, combined with behavioral economic theories offering descriptive models for people making risky decisions,[@kahneman1979; @loomes1982] I propose 'Counterfactual Predicted Utility Theory' (CPUT) as a neurobiologically-plausible theory of decision-making under risk.

The intuition behind CPUT is the idea that people account for counterfactual outcomes when faced with a prospect and the integration of factual and counterfactual signals in the brain may discount or invert their preference for choosing one option over another. I hypothesize that this preference-reversal is modulated by a counterfactual weighting term, $\gamma$, which may vary across people. 

To formally derive CPUT, we can revisit the prospect I introduced in the first chapter with a hypothetical casino game. There are two options: choosing one will certainly three-thousand dollars; choosing another will give you an 80% chance of four-thousand dollars or nothing. Such a prospect is commonly denoted as follows where the first option leads to outcome $x_1$ with probability $p_1$ and the second option leads to outcomes $x_2$ with probability $p_2$.

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
\text{Option 1} &= (x_1, p_1) \\ 
\text{Option 2} &= (x_2, p_2)
\end{aligned}
(\#eq:prospect-notation)
\end{equation}
```

Unless otherwise stated, the alternative outcomes of an option are assumed to be zero. That is, choosing Option 1 is a choice of receiving $x_1$ with probability $p_1$ or nothing with probability $(1 - p_1)$. A more explicit, and generalizable, representation of a prospect can be seen in Figure \@ref(fig:prospect-diagram-general). Here, Option 1 is a choice of receiving $x_{1a}$ with probability $p_1$ or $x_{1b}$ with probability $(1 - p_1)$. Similarly, Option 2 is a choice of receiving $x_{2a}$ with probability $p_2$ or $x_{2b}$ with probability $(1 - p_2)$.

![(\#fig:prospect-diagram-general)Explicit representation of a prospect with two options. Choosing option 1 may lead to outcome $x_{1a}$ with probability $p_1$ or outcome $x_{1b}$ with probability $(1 - p_1)$. Choosing option 2 may lead to outcome $x_{2a}$ with probability $p_2$ or outcome $x_{2b}$ with probability $(1 - p_2)$.](/Users/jt/Desktop/R/Academic/Kishida Lab/masters-thesis/thesis-documents/figures/prospect_diagram_general.png)

With this representation, we can begin to formally define an option's counterfactual utility, $U_C$, as follows:

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
U_{C}(\text{Option 1}) = p_{1} \cdot V_{C}(x_{1a}) + (1 - p_{1}) \cdot V_{C}(x_{1b}) \\ 
U_{C}(\text{Option 2}) = p_{2} \cdot V_{C}(x_{2a}) + (1 - p_{2}) \cdot V_{C}(x_{2b})
\end{split}
(\#eq:calculating-uc) 
\end{equation}
```

In contrast, for Expected Utility Theory, an option's expected value is exponentiated by a *risk-aversion* parameter, $\rho$. The expected utility definition in Equation \@ref(eq:calculating-ue) represents the same weighting as of probabilities and outcomes from Equation \@ref(eq:calculating-uc). 

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
U_{E}(\text{Option 1}) = (p_{1} \cdot V_{E}(x_{1}) + (1 - p_{1}) \cdot V_{E}(x_{2}))^\rho \\   
U_{E}(\text{Option 2}) = (p_{2} \cdot V_{E}(x_{4}) + (1 - p_{2}) \cdot V_{E}(x_{3}))^\rho
\end{split}
(\#eq:calculating-ue)
\end{equation}
```

To represent the equations similarly, we define the $V_E$ as the estimated expected utility value (but this is really just stated outcome). For CPUT, however, we formally define the transformation of the stated outcome as the face value minus a weighted sum of that option's alternative outcome and the other option's expected value. This notation is expressed in Equation \@ref(eq:eut-cput-transformations), which shows how a prospect of the form depicted in Figure \@ref(fig:prospect-diagram-general) are represented.

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
\text{EUT:} \\
    V_{E}(x_{1a}) = x_{1a} \\
    V_{E}(x_{1b}) = x_{1b} \\
    V_{E}(x_{2a}) = x_{2a} \\
    V_{E}(x_{2b}) = x_{2b}
\end{split}
\hspace{3cm}
\begin{split}
\text{CPUT:} \\
    V_{C}(x_{1a}) = x_{1a} - \gamma[x_{1b} + EV(\text{Option 2})] \\
    V_{C}(x_{1b}) = x_{1b} - \gamma[x_{1a} + EV(\text{Option 2})] \\
    V_{C}(x_{2a}) = x_{2a} - \gamma[x_{2b} + EV(\text{Option 1})] \\
    V_{C}(x_{2b}) = x_{2b} - \gamma[x_{2a} + EV(\text{Option 1})]
\end{split}
(\#eq:eut-cput-transformations)
\end{equation}
```

Unlike the estimated expected utility value, $V_E$, the estimated counterfactual utility value, $V_C$ is not a one-to-one mapping for the stated outcomes. To provide a better intuition for this within- and between-option dependency, it is helpful to consider a concrete example. By adapting Figure \@ref(fig:prospect-diagram-general) to include the values from the casino example initially described, we can better see how each possible outcome may integrate when evaluating a given prospect.

![(\#fig:prospect-diagram-kt)Example prospect diagram to visualize counterfactual integration. Choosing option 1 may lead to outcome $\$3000$ with probability $1.0$ or outcome $\$0$ with probability $(1 - 1.0)$. Choosing option 2 may lead to outcome $\$4000$ with probability $0.8$ or outcome $\$0$ with probability $(1 - 0.8)$. Estimating the counterfactual utility value of possible outcomes are dependent on one-another.](/Users/jt/Desktop/R/Academic/Kishida Lab/masters-thesis/thesis-documents/figures/prospect_diagram_kt.png)

To illustrate CPUT by walking-through Figure \@ref(fig:prospect-diagram-kt), let's assume that I have a counterfactual-weighting term of $\gamma = 0.1$. This means that the stated outcomes are transformed given the available counterfactual information from each potential outcome as follows:

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
V_{C}(\$3000) &= 3000 - 0.1[0 + EV(\text{Option 2})] \\
&= 3000 - 0.1[0 + 3200] \\
&= 2680 \\
V_{C}(\$0) &= 0 - 0.1[3000 + EV(\text{Option 2})] \\
&= 0 - 0.1[3000 + 3200] \\
&= -620 \\
V_{C}(\$4000) &= 4000 - 0.1[0 + EV(\text{Option 1})] \\
&= 0 - 0.1[4000 + 3000] \\
&= -700 \\
V_{C}(\$0) &= 0 - 0.1[4000 + EV(\text{Option 1})] \\
&= 4000 - 0.1[0 + 3000] \\
&= 3700 \\
\end{aligned}
(\#eq:cput-transformation-kt-demo)
\end{equation}
```

When these values are combined by Equation \@ref(eq:calculating-uc), we see that $U_C(\text{Option 2}) > U_C(\text{Option 1})$:

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
U_{C}(\text{Option 1}) &= 1 \cdot 2680 + (1 - 1) \cdot -620) \\ 
&= 2680 \\
U_{C}(\text{Option 2}) &= 0.8 \cdot 3700 + (1 - 0.8) \cdot -700) \\
&= 2820
\end{aligned}
(\#eq:calculating-uc-kt-demo) 
\end{equation}
```

To maximize my utility, I would choose Option 2 and progress down the diagram to the first node on the right-hand side. In doing this, I forwent the opportunity to have Option 1. If I chose differently, I would have reached the node on the left, which has an expected value of \$3000, but I didn't. From my current position, there is an 80% chance that I will find myself in the red node, with \$4000. If the proverbial coin-flip goes against me, however, I would find myself at the cyan node with nothing to show for it. By walking-through this example, I hoped to convey how the possible outcomes relate to one-another and how factual and counterfactual information may be integrated to inform one's decision. 

Importantly, these equations suggest that when $\gamma = 0$, when one places no weight on counterfactual events, the counterfactual utility is equivalent to the expected value. In other words, when $\gamma = 0$, $U_C(\text{Option 1}) = EV(\text{Option 1})$ and $U_C(\text{Option 2}) = EV(\text{Option 2})$. If people don't place weight on counterfactual information, we might expect choice behavior to be consistent with maximizing expected value (or, to better compare theories of decision-making, maximizing expected utility). To provide evidence in support of CPUT as a generative theory of decision-making, I test the hypothesis that $\gamma > 0$ which means that people *do* consider counterfactual outcomes when faced with a risky prospect. To do this, I use choice data from a 'Sure Bet or Gamble' task.

Commit message:

Deploying to gh-pages from @ jdtrat/masters-thesis@8bf58c731bef8a0c491bd2dd29997604591ef952 🚀

03_cput.md, after:

---
bibliography: references.bib
---

# Counterfactual Predicted Utility Theory

As discussed in the neurobiology of decision-making chapter, the neurotransmitter dopamine seemingly encodes information about actual and counterfactual rewards,[@kishida2016] and their integration may play a guiding role in decision-making. With this neural evidence, combined with behavioral economic theories offering descriptive models for people making risky decisions,[@kahneman1979; @loomes1982] I propose 'Counterfactual Predicted Utility Theory' (CPUT) as a neurobiologically-plausible theory of decision-making under risk.

The impetus behind CPUT is the idea that people account for counterfactual outcomes when faced with a prospect and the integration of factual and counterfactual signals in the brain may discount or invert their preference for choosing one option over another. I hypothesize that this preference-reversal is modulated by a counterfactual weighting term, $\gamma$, which may vary across people. 

To formally derive CPUT, we can revisit the prospect I introduced in the first chapter with a hypothetical casino game. There are two options: choosing one will certainly three-thousand dollars; choosing another will give you an 80% chance of four-thousand dollars or nothing. Such a prospect is commonly denoted as follows where the first option leads to outcome $x_1$ with probability $p_1$ and the second option leads to outcomes $x_2$ with probability $p_2$.

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
\text{Option 1} &= (x_1, p_1) \\ 
\text{Option 2} &= (x_2, p_2)
\end{aligned}
(\#eq:prospect-notation)
\end{equation}
```

Unless otherwise stated, the alternative outcomes of an option are assumed to be zero. That is, choosing Option 1 is a choice of receiving $x_1$ with probability $p_1$ or nothing with probability $(1 - p_1)$. A more explicit, and generalizable, representation of a prospect can be seen in Figure \@ref(fig:prospect-diagram-general). Here, Option 1 is a choice of receiving $x_{1a}$ with probability $p_1$ or $x_{1b}$ with probability $(1 - p_1)$. Similarly, Option 2 is a choice of receiving $x_{2a}$ with probability $p_2$ or $x_{2b}$ with probability $(1 - p_2)$.

![(\#fig:prospect-diagram-general)Explicit representation of a prospect with two options. Choosing option 1 may lead to outcome $x_{1a}$ with probability $p_1$ or outcome $x_{1b}$ with probability $(1 - p_1)$. Choosing option 2 may lead to outcome $x_{2a}$ with probability $p_2$ or outcome $x_{2b}$ with probability $(1 - p_2)$.](/Users/jt/Desktop/R/Academic/Kishida Lab/masters-thesis/thesis-documents/figures/prospect_diagram_general.png)

With this representation, we can begin to formally define an option's counterfactual utility, $U_C$, as follows:

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
U_{C}(\text{Option 1}) = p_{1} \cdot V_{C}(x_{1a}) + (1 - p_{1}) \cdot V_{C}(x_{1b}) \\ 
U_{C}(\text{Option 2}) = p_{2} \cdot V_{C}(x_{2a}) + (1 - p_{2}) \cdot V_{C}(x_{2b})
\end{split}
(\#eq:calculating-uc) 
\end{equation}
```

In contrast, for Expected Utility Theory, an option's expected value is exponentiated by a *risk-aversion* parameter, $\rho$. The expected utility definition in Equation \@ref(eq:calculating-ue) represents the same weighting as of probabilities and outcomes from Equation \@ref(eq:calculating-uc). 

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
U_{E}(\text{Option 1}) = (p_{1} \cdot V_{E}(x_{1}) + (1 - p_{1}) \cdot V_{E}(x_{2}))^\rho \\   
U_{E}(\text{Option 2}) = (p_{2} \cdot V_{E}(x_{4}) + (1 - p_{2}) \cdot V_{E}(x_{3}))^\rho
\end{split}
(\#eq:calculating-ue)
\end{equation}
```

To represent the equations similarly, we define the $V_E$ as the estimated expected utility value (but this is really just stated outcome). For CPUT, however, we formally define the transformation of the stated outcome as the face value minus a weighted sum of that option's alternative outcome and the other option's expected value. This notation is expressed in Equation \@ref(eq:eut-cput-transformations), which shows how a prospect of the form depicted in Figure \@ref(fig:prospect-diagram-general) are represented.

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
\text{EUT:} \\
    V_{E}(x_{1a}) = x_{1a} \\
    V_{E}(x_{1b}) = x_{1b} \\
    V_{E}(x_{2a}) = x_{2a} \\
    V_{E}(x_{2b}) = x_{2b}
\end{split}
\hspace{3cm}
\begin{split}
\text{CPUT:} \\
    V_{C}(x_{1a}) = x_{1a} - \gamma[x_{1b} + EV(\text{Option 2})] \\
    V_{C}(x_{1b}) = x_{1b} - \gamma[x_{1a} + EV(\text{Option 2})] \\
    V_{C}(x_{2a}) = x_{2a} - \gamma[x_{2b} + EV(\text{Option 1})] \\
    V_{C}(x_{2b}) = x_{2b} - \gamma[x_{2a} + EV(\text{Option 1})]
\end{split}
(\#eq:eut-cput-transformations)
\end{equation}
```

Unlike the estimated expected utility value, $V_E$, the estimated counterfactual utility value, $V_C$ is not a one-to-one mapping for the stated outcomes. To provide a better intuition for this within- and between-option dependency, it is helpful to consider a concrete example. By adapting Figure \@ref(fig:prospect-diagram-general) to include the values from the casino example initially described, we can better see how each possible outcome may integrate when evaluating a given prospect.

![(\#fig:prospect-diagram-kt)Example prospect diagram to visualize counterfactual integration. Choosing option 1 may lead to outcome $\$3000$ with probability $1.0$ or outcome $\$0$ with probability $(1 - 1.0)$. Choosing option 2 may lead to outcome $\$4000$ with probability $0.8$ or outcome $\$0$ with probability $(1 - 0.8)$. Estimating the counterfactual utility value of possible outcomes are dependent on one-another.](/Users/jt/Desktop/R/Academic/Kishida Lab/masters-thesis/thesis-documents/figures/prospect_diagram_kt.png)

To illustrate CPUT by walking-through Figure \@ref(fig:prospect-diagram-kt), let's assume that I have a counterfactual-weighting term of $\gamma = 0.1$. This means that the stated outcomes are transformed given the available counterfactual information from each potential outcome as follows:

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
V_{C}(\$3000) &= 3000 - 0.1[0 + EV(\text{Option 2})] \\
&= 3000 - 0.1[0 + 3200] \\
&= 2680 \\
V_{C}(\$0) &= 0 - 0.1[3000 + EV(\text{Option 2})] \\
&= 0 - 0.1[3000 + 3200] \\
&= -620 \\
V_{C}(\$4000) &= 4000 - 0.1[0 + EV(\text{Option 1})] \\
&= 0 - 0.1[4000 + 3000] \\
&= -700 \\
V_{C}(\$0) &= 0 - 0.1[4000 + EV(\text{Option 1})] \\
&= 4000 - 0.1[0 + 3000] \\
&= 3700 \\
\end{aligned}
(\#eq:cput-transformation-kt-demo)
\end{equation}
```

When these values are combined by Equation \@ref(eq:calculating-uc), we see that $U_C(\text{Option 2}) > U_C(\text{Option 1})$:

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
U_{C}(\text{Option 1}) &= 1 \cdot 2680 + (1 - 1) \cdot -620) \\ 
&= 2680 \\
U_{C}(\text{Option 2}) &= 0.8 \cdot 3700 + (1 - 0.8) \cdot -700) \\
&= 2820
\end{aligned}
(\#eq:calculating-uc-kt-demo) 
\end{equation}
```

To maximize my utility, I would choose Option 2 and progress down the diagram to the first node on the right-hand side. In doing this, I forwent the opportunity to have Option 1. If I chose differently, I would have reached the node on the left, which has an expected value of \$3000, but I didn't. From my current position, there is an 80% chance that I will find myself in the red node, with \$4000. If the proverbial coin-flip goes against me, however, I would find myself at the cyan node with nothing to show for it. By walking-through this example, I hoped to convey how the possible outcomes relate to one-another and how factual and counterfactual information may be integrated to inform one's decision. 

Importantly, these equations suggest that when $\gamma = 0$, when one places no weight on counterfactual events, the counterfactual utility is equivalent to the expected value. In other words, when $\gamma = 0$, $U_C(\text{Option 1}) = EV(\text{Option 1})$ and $U_C(\text{Option 2}) = EV(\text{Option 2})$. If people don't place weight on counterfactual information, we might expect choice behavior to be consistent with maximizing expected value (or, to better compare theories of decision-making, maximizing expected utility). To provide evidence in support of CPUT as a generative theory of decision-making, I will test the hypothesis that $\gamma > 0$ which means that people *do* consider counterfactual outcomes when faced with a risky prospect. To summarize what I discussed in this chapter:

* I addressed my first thesis aim of developing counterfactual predicted utility theory (CPUT) as an alternative to expected utility theory to explain decision-making under risk. 
* I showed how information about each potential outcome (terminal node of Figure \@ref(fig:prospect-diagram-general)) integrates with a counterfactual weighting parameter, $\gamma$, to adjust the utility of one option over another. 
* I walked-through an example calculation assuming $\gamma = 0.1$ (diagrammed in Figure \@ref(fig:prospect-diagram-general)). 

In the next chapter, I begin to address my second thesis aim of assessing the predictive accuracy of CPUT using human choice data from a 'Sure Bet or Gamble' task.[@liebenow2021]
